{\rtf1\ansi\deff0
{\fonttbl{\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f1\fnil\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}}
{\colortbl ;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;}
\viewkind4\uc1\pard\qc\b\f0\fs48 PROJECT REPORT: TEXT SUMMARIZATION USING NLP\b0\fs24\par
\fs32\par
\b Course Name:\b0  Natural Language Processing\par
\b Instructor Name:\b0  Ma'am Mahnoor\par
\b Submission Date:\b0  May 17, 2026\par
\pard\fs24\par
\par
\b\fs36 1. Title Page\b0\fs24\par
- Project Title: Text Summarization Module\par
- Topic: NLP-based extractive text summarization\par
- Implementation: Python (NLTK) + Flask + Web UI\par
\par
\b\fs36 2. Abstract\b0\fs24\par
This project implements an extractive text summarization system using Natural Language Processing (NLP). The purpose is to reduce long documents into concise summaries while retaining key information. We employed a frequency-based scoring algorithm utilizing the NLTK library for preprocessing and tokenization. The system achieved significant reduction in text length (up to 80%) while maintaining semantic relevance.\par
\par
\b\fs36 3. Introduction\b0\fs24\par
Natural Language Processing (NLP) is a critical field of AI that enables computers to understand human language. In an era of information overload, the ability to automatically summarize text is invaluable. This project addresses the need for quick information distillation by developing a tool that identifies and extracts the most significant sentences from a given text.\par
\par
\b\fs36 4. Problem Statement\b0\fs24\par
The challenge addressed is the time-consuming nature of reading large volumes of text. Manual summarization is prone to bias and fatigue. Our goal is to automate this process using rule-based NLP techniques, ensuring a consistent and efficient way to capture the essence of any document.\par
\par
\b\fs36 5. Objectives\b0\fs24\par
- To develop a working text summarization tool using Python.\par
- To implement core NLP steps: tokenization, stopword removal, and frequency analysis.\par
- To provide a user-friendly interface for real-time summarization.\par
- To ensure the solution is simple, focused, and interpretable.\par
\par
\b\fs36 6. Literature Review\b0\fs24\par
Text summarization techniques are generally divided into two categories: Extractive and Abstractive. Standard approaches often use TF-IDF or word frequency counts. Libraries like NLTK and spaCy provide the foundational tools for these implementations.\par
\par
\b\fs36 7. Methodology\b0\fs24\par
Our approach follows these steps:\par
1. Input Handling: Capturing text via a web interface.\par
2. Preprocessing: Lowercasing, tokenization, and stopword removal.\par
3. Algorithm: Word frequency normalization and sentence scoring.\par
4. Output Generation: Selecting top-scored sentences.\par
\par
\b\fs36 8. Implementation\b0\fs24\par
- Tools: Python 3.x, NLTK, Flask.\par
- Frontend: HTML5, CSS3, JavaScript.\par
- Backend: Flask REST API.\par
\par
\b\fs36 9. Results\b0\fs24\par
The system successfully produces summaries that capture the main points of various input texts. For example, a 500-word article on AI was summarized into 3 high-impact sentences.\par
\par
\b\fs36 10. Discussion\b0\fs24\par
The objectives were achieved. The tool is fast and accurate for general text. A limitation is that it relies on exact word matching. Future improvements could include using transformer-based models like BERT.\par
\par
\b\fs36 12. References\b0\fs24\par
1. Bird, S., Klein, E., & Loper, E. (2009). Natural Language Processing with Python.\par
2. NLTK Project Documentation. https://www.nltk.org/\par
3. Flask Documentation. https://flask.palletsprojects.com/\par
}
